docs/content/quickstart.md, before:

# Installation Guide

This guide provides quickstart instructions for deploying the MaaS Platform infrastructure.

!!! note
    For more detailed instructions, please refer to [Installation under the Administrator Guide](install/prerequisites.md).

## Prerequisites

- **OpenShift cluster** (4.19.9+) with kubectl/oc access
      - **Recommended** 16 vCPUs, 32GB RAM, 100GB storage
- **ODH/RHOAI requirements**:
      - RHOAI 3.0 +
      - ODH 3.0 +
- **RHCL requirements** (Note: This can be installed automatically by the script below):
      - RHCL 1.2 +
- **Cluster admin** or equivalent permissions
- **Required tools**:
      - `oc` (OpenShift CLI)
      - `kubectl`
      - `jq`
      - `kustomize` (v5.7.0+)
      - `gsed` (GNU sed) - **macOS only**: `brew install gnu-sed`

## Quick Start

### Automated OpenShift Deployment (Recommended)

For OpenShift clusters, use the automated deployment script:

```bash
export MAAS_REF="main"  # Use the latest release tag, or "main" for development
./scripts/deploy-rhoai-stable.sh
```

!!! note "Using Release Tags"
    The `MAAS_REF` environment variable should reference a release tag (e.g., `v1.0.0`) for production deployments.
    The release workflow automatically updates all `MAAS_REF="main"` references in documentation and scripts
    to use the new release tag when a release is created. Use `"main"` only for development/testing.

### Verify Deployment

The deployment script creates the following core resources:

- **Gateway**: `maas-default-gateway` in `openshift-ingress` namespace
- **HTTPRoutes**: `maas-api-route` in the `redhat-ods-applications` namespace (deployed by operator)
- **Policies**:
  - `maas-api-auth-policy` (deployed by operator) - Protects MaaS API
  - `gateway-auth-policy` (deployed by script) - Protects Gateway/model inference
  - `TokenRateLimitPolicy`, `RateLimitPolicy` (deployed by script) - Usage limits
- **MaaS API**: Deployment and service in `redhat-ods-applications` namespace (deployed by operator)
- **Operators**: Cert-manager, LWS, Red Hat Connectivity Link and Red Hat OpenShift AI.

Check deployment status:

```bash
# Check all namespaces
kubectl get ns | grep -E "kuadrant-system|kserve|opendatahub|redhat-ods-applications|llm"

# Check Gateway status
kubectl get gateway -n openshift-ingress maas-default-gateway

# Check policies
kubectl get authpolicy -A
kubectl get tokenratelimitpolicy -A
kubectl get ratelimitpolicy -A

# Check MaaS API (deployed by operator in redhat-ods-applications)
kubectl get pods -n redhat-ods-applications -l app.kubernetes.io/name=maas-api
kubectl get svc -n redhat-ods-applications maas-api

# Check Kuadrant operators
kubectl get pods -n kuadrant-system

# Check RHOAI/KServe
kubectl get pods -n kserve
kubectl get pods -n redhat-ods-applications
```

## Model Setup (Optional)

### Deploy Sample Models (Optional)

#### Simulator Model (CPU)

```bash
PROJECT_DIR=$(git rev-parse --show-toplevel)
kustomize build ${PROJECT_DIR}/docs/samples/models/simulator/ | kubectl apply -f -
```

#### Facebook OPT-125M Model (CPU)

```bash
PROJECT_DIR=$(git rev-parse --show-toplevel)
kustomize build ${PROJECT_DIR}/docs/samples/models/facebook-opt-125m-cpu/ | kubectl apply -f -
```

#### Qwen3 Model (GPU Required)

!!! warning
    This model requires GPU nodes with `nvidia.com/gpu` resources available in your cluster.

```bash
PROJECT_DIR=$(git rev-parse --show-toplevel)
kustomize build ${PROJECT_DIR}/docs/samples/models/qwen3/ | kubectl apply -f -
```

#### Verify Model Deployment

```bash
# Check LLMInferenceService status
kubectl get llminferenceservices -n llm

# Check pods
kubectl get pods -n llm
```

#### Update Existing Models (Optional)

To update an existing model, modify the `LLMInferenceService` to use the newly created `maas-default-gateway` gateway.

```bash
kubectl patch llminferenceservice my-production-model -n llm --type='json' -p='[
  {
    "op": "add",
    "path": "/spec/gateway/refs/-",
    "value": {
      "name": "maas-default-gateway",
      "namespace": "openshift-ingress"
    }
  }
]'
```

```yaml
apiVersion: serving.kserve.io/v1alpha1
kind: LLMInferenceService
metadata:
  name: my-production-model
spec:
  gateway:
    refs:
      - name: maas-default-gateway
        namespace: openshift-ingress
```

## Next Steps

After installation, proceed to [Validation](install/validation.md) to test and verify your deployment.

Commit message:

docs(install): consolidates validation and troubleshooting into single reference
Installation documentation was fragmented across multiple files, making it
difficult for users to find verification commands and troubleshoot issues.
Custom audience configuration was buried in installation steps rather than
where users look when encountering 401 errors.

Moves custom token audience configuration to troubleshooting, adds namespace
reference table and TLS verification to the validation guide, and links
related docs together so users don't have to hunt for information.

Signed-off-by: Bartosz Majsak <bartosz.majsak@gmail.com>

docs/content/quickstart.md, after:

# Installation Guide

This guide provides quickstart instructions for deploying the MaaS Platform infrastructure.

!!! note
    For more detailed instructions, please refer to [Installation under the Administrator Guide](install/prerequisites.md).

## Prerequisites

- **OpenShift cluster** (4.19.9+) with kubectl/oc access
      - **Recommended** 16 vCPUs, 32GB RAM, 100GB storage
- **ODH/RHOAI requirements**:
      - RHOAI 3.0 +
      - ODH 3.0 +
- **RHCL requirements** (Note: This can be installed automatically by the script below):
      - RHCL 1.2 +
- **Cluster admin** or equivalent permissions
- **Required tools**:
      - `oc` (OpenShift CLI)
      - `kubectl`
      - `jq`
      - `kustomize` (v5.7.0+)
      - `gsed` (GNU sed) - **macOS only**: `brew install gnu-sed`

## Quick Start

### Automated OpenShift Deployment (Recommended)

For OpenShift clusters, use the automated deployment script:

```bash
export MAAS_REF="main"  # Use the latest release tag, or "main" for development
./scripts/deploy-rhoai-stable.sh
```

!!! note "Using Release Tags"
    The `MAAS_REF` environment variable should reference a release tag (e.g., `v1.0.0`) for production deployments.
    The release workflow automatically updates all `MAAS_REF="main"` references in documentation and scripts
    to use the new release tag when a release is created. Use `"main"` only for development/testing.

### Verify Deployment

The deployment script creates the following core resources:

- **Gateway**: `maas-default-gateway` in `openshift-ingress` namespace
- **HTTPRoutes**: `maas-api-route` in the `redhat-ods-applications` namespace (deployed by operator)
- **Policies**:
  - `maas-api-auth-policy` (deployed by operator) - Protects MaaS API
  - `gateway-auth-policy` (deployed by script) - Protects Gateway/model inference
  - `TokenRateLimitPolicy`, `RateLimitPolicy` (deployed by script) - Usage limits
- **MaaS API**: Deployment and service in `redhat-ods-applications` namespace (deployed by operator)
- **Operators**: Cert-manager, LWS, Red Hat Connectivity Link and Red Hat OpenShift AI.

Check deployment status:

```bash
# Check all namespaces
kubectl get ns | grep -E "kuadrant-system|kserve|opendatahub|redhat-ods-applications|llm"

# Check Gateway status
kubectl get gateway -n openshift-ingress maas-default-gateway

# Check policies
kubectl get authpolicy -A
kubectl get tokenratelimitpolicy -A
kubectl get ratelimitpolicy -A

# Check MaaS API (deployed by operator in redhat-ods-applications)
kubectl get pods -n redhat-ods-applications -l app.kubernetes.io/name=maas-api
kubectl get svc -n redhat-ods-applications maas-api

# Check Kuadrant operators
kubectl get pods -n kuadrant-system

# Check RHOAI/KServe
kubectl get pods -n kserve
kubectl get pods -n redhat-ods-applications
```

!!! tip "TLS Configuration"
    TLS is enabled by default. See [TLS Configuration](configuration-and-management/tls-configuration.md) for details.

For detailed validation and troubleshooting, see the [Validation Guide](install/validation.md).

## Model Setup

!!! note
    At least one model must be deployed to validate the installation using the [Validation Guide](install/validation.md).

### Deploy Sample Models

#### Simulator Model (CPU)

```bash
PROJECT_DIR=$(git rev-parse --show-toplevel)
kustomize build ${PROJECT_DIR}/docs/samples/models/simulator/ | kubectl apply -f -
```

#### Facebook OPT-125M Model (CPU)

```bash
PROJECT_DIR=$(git rev-parse --show-toplevel)
kustomize build ${PROJECT_DIR}/docs/samples/models/facebook-opt-125m-cpu/ | kubectl apply -f -
```

#### Qwen3 Model (GPU Required)

!!! warning
    This model requires GPU nodes with `nvidia.com/gpu` resources available in your cluster.

```bash
PROJECT_DIR=$(git rev-parse --show-toplevel)
kustomize build ${PROJECT_DIR}/docs/samples/models/qwen3/ | kubectl apply -f -
```

#### Verify Model Deployment

```bash
# Check LLMInferenceService status
kubectl get llminferenceservices -n llm

# Check pods
kubectl get pods -n llm
```

#### Update Existing Models (Optional)

To update an existing model, modify the `LLMInferenceService` to use the newly created `maas-default-gateway` gateway.

```bash
kubectl patch llminferenceservice my-production-model -n llm --type='json' -p='[
  {
    "op": "add",
    "path": "/spec/gateway/refs/-",
    "value": {
      "name": "maas-default-gateway",
      "namespace": "openshift-ingress"
    }
  }
]'
```

```yaml
apiVersion: serving.kserve.io/v1alpha1
kind: LLMInferenceService
metadata:
  name: my-production-model
spec:
  gateway:
    refs:
      - name: maas-default-gateway
        namespace: openshift-ingress
```

## Next Steps

After installation, proceed to [Validation](install/validation.md) to test and verify your deployment.
